Troubleshooting docs for ACTION_RESTORE_FROM_SNAPSHOT (#87692)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/tab-widgets/troubleshooting/data/restore-from-snapshot.asciidoc

{cloud}/ec-access-kibana.html[enable it first].
+
. Open your deployment's side navigation menu (placed under the Elastic logo in the upper left corner)
and go to **Stack Management > Index Management**.
+
. In this step we are going to find all the indices and data streams missing data. If you already have that information
you could skip this. Go in the **Indices** tab, enable **Include hidden indices** toggle and find all the open indices
that have an empty **Health** and empty **Data stream**, keep their names somewhere handy. Then, go to the
**Data Streams** tab and keep the name of all the data streams whose **Health** is `red`.
+
[role="screenshot"]
image::images/troubleshooting/data/kibana-index-management-select-red-indices.png[{kib} indices,align="center"]
+
[role="screenshot"]
image::images/troubleshooting/data/kibana-index-management-select-red-data-steams.png[{kib} data streams,align="center"]
+
. Use the left side menu to go to **Snapshot and Restore**, there you can verify that you have a snapshot to restore
the target indices and data streams from. By clicking on every snapshot you can see the indices and data streams it

> contains. Not all resources need to be restored from the same snapshot. **Do not proceed** there is no workable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
contains. Not all resources need to be restored from the same snapshot. **Do not proceed** if there is no workable
```

Reviewer: I find this a bit confusing - what does "workable backup" mean here? An up-to-date enough backup or the index existing at all in the snapshot? 

Should we remove it or be more precise?

Author: I think we should make it more precise, it is good to warn the user about permanent implications.

backup of the affected resources in a snapshot, this will result in further data loss.
+
[role="screenshot"]
image::images/troubleshooting/data/kibana-restore-snapshot-content.png[{kib} snapshots,align="center"]
+
. Go back to **Index Management** via the left side menu. In **Indices** enable **Include hidden indices** toggle and
delete all the indices that have noted, by selecting them and then using the **Manage index** button

> choose delete index. In the **Data Streams** tab repeat the same by selecting the `red` data streams and then

Reviewer: Would closing the index be enough? It seems that we're recommending closing them in the on-prem version

Author: Well it would be enough but the user experience is not as good. 

Let me elaborate, when a user restores a snapshot via the UI they cannot select a backing index, they can only select a data stream. This would mean that we have to explain to the user, that they need to go to the index, select all the backing indices of their data stream, close them, and then restore the data stream. I thought since we are trying to avoid confusing the user that we might want to stay away from backing indices etc. 

What do you think?

Reviewer: Ah I see, thanks for the details

      "uuid" : "dZyPs1HyTwS-cnKdH08EPg",
      "repository" : "snap-repo",                                           <2>
      "indices" : [                                                         <3>
        ".apm-agent-configuration",
        ".apm-custom-link",
        ".ds-.logs-deprecation.elasticsearch-default-2022.06.17-000001",
        ".ds-ilm-history-5-2022.06.17-000001",
        ".ds-my-data-stream-2022.06.17-000001",
        ".geoip_databases",
        ".kibana-event-log-8.2.2-000001",
        ".kibana_8.2.2_001",
        ".kibana_task_manager_8.2.2_001",
        "kibana_sample_data_ecommerce",
        "kibana_sample_data_flights",
        "kibana_sample_data_logs"
      ],
      "data_streams" : [ ],
      "state" : "SUCCESS"                                                     <4>
    }
  ],
  "total" : 1,
  "remaining" : 0
}
----
// TEST[skip:illustration purposes only]
+
<1> The name of the snapshot.
+
<2> The repository of the snapshot.
+
<3> The indices backed up in the snapshot.
+
<4> If the snapshot was successful.

. The snapshot `snapshot-20200617` contains the two indices we want to restore.

> You might have multiple snapshots from which you could restore the target indices.The explanation in our case indicates the index allocation configurations are not correct.

Reviewer: What does "The explanation in our case indicates the index allocation configurations are not correct"  mean?
Would this refer to the explain API? What index configurations would this refer to? 

Should we remove this or maybe change it to be more precise?

Author: This sentence was not intended, some weird mistake on my end, I removed it.

> You might have multiple snapshots from which you could restore the target indices.The explanation in our case indicates the index allocation configurations are not correct.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You might have multiple snapshots from which you could restore the target indices.
```

> Choose the latest one. Now that we found a snapshot, we will close the target indices via the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Choose the latest snapshot. Now that we found a snapshot, we will close the target indices via the <<indices-close, close indices API>>.
```

> To review your allocation settings, use the <<indices-close, close indices API>>.

Reviewer: A different API should be used here? 
And maybe moved below the example of using the close indices API?

Author: Actually, this: `To review your allocation settings, use` shouldn't be there

Author: Fixed

+
[source,console]
----
POST kibana_sample_data_flights,.ds-my-data-stream-2022.06.17-000001/_close
----
// TEST[skip:illustration purposes only]
+
You can confirm that they are closed with the
the <<cat-indices, cat indices API>>.
+
[source,console]
----
GET _cat/indices?v&health=red&h=index,status,health
----
// TEST[skip:illustration purposes only]
+
The response will look like this:
+
[source,console-result]
----
index                                status health
.ds-my-data-stream-2022.06.17-000001 close   red
kibana_sample_data_flights           close   red
----
+
. The indices are closed, now we can restore the, from snapshots without causing
any complications using the <<restore-snapshot-api, restore snapshot API>>:
+
[source,console]
----
POST _snapshot/snap-repo/snapshot-20200617/_restore
{
  "indices": "kibana_sample_data_flights,.ds-my-data-stream-2022.06.17-000001", <1>
  "include_aliases": true                                                       <2>
}
----
// TEST[skip:illustration purposes only]
+
<1> The indices to restore.
+
<2> We also want to restore the aliases.

> . Finally we can verify that the indices are not `red` any more via the <<cat-indices,cat indices API>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Finally we can verify that the indices health is now `green` via the <<cat-indices,cat indices API>>.
```

// tag::cloud[]
In order to restore the indices and data streams that are missing data:

**Use {kib}**

//tag::kibana-api-ex[]
. Log in to the {ess-console}[{ecloud} console].

> +

Reviewer 2: These pluses are all showing on the page, but I don't think they were intended. Should we removed them?

Author: Definitely not intended. I will fix it.

image::images/troubleshooting/data/kibana-restore-snapshot-content.png[{kib} snapshots,align="center"]
+
. Go back to **Index Management** via the left side menu. In **Indices** enable **Include hidden indices** toggle and
delete all the indices that have noted, by selecting them and then using the **Manage index** button
choose delete index. In the **Data Streams** tab repeat the same by selecting the `red` data streams and then
clicking **Delete data steam**.
+
. Use the left side menu to go back to **Snapshot and Restore**, click on the snapshot that you would like to restore
from then click **Restore**. In the next page disable the toggle *All data streams and indices, including system
indices*, deselect all and then choose the indices and data streams you would like to restore.
+
[role="screenshot"]
image::images/troubleshooting/data/kibana-restore-snapshot-select-resources.png[{kib} select resources to restore,align="center"]
+
. Click **Next** twice to continue without changing anything else and finally click **Restore Snapshot**.
+
[role="screenshot"]
image::images/troubleshooting/data/kibana-restore-snapshot-confirm.png[{kib} confirm snapshot restore,width=30%]
+

> . When the process will be complete you will see in the **Restore Status** tab the result of your restore.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. When the process is complete, you will see in the **Restore Status** tab the result of your restore.
```
The sentence reads better with the current tense and a comma.

+
[role="screenshot"]
image::images/troubleshooting/data/kibana-restore-snapshot-result.png[{kib} select resources to restore,align="center"]
+
For more guidance on creating and restoring snapshots see
<<snapshot-restore, this guide>>.

//end::kibana-api-ex[]
// end::cloud[]

// tag::self-managed[]
In order to restore the indices that are missing shards:

> . View the affected indices shards using the <<cat-indices,cat indices API>>.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. View the affected indices using the <<cat-indices,cat indices API>>.
```
Do you mean to include the word `shards` here?

+
[source,console]
----
GET _cat/indices?v&health=red&h=index,status,health
----
+
The response will look like this:
+
[source,console-result]
----
index                                status health
.ds-my-data-stream-2022.06.17-000001 open   red
kibana_sample_data_flights           open   red
----
// TEST[skip:illustration purposes only]
+
The `red` health of the indices above indicates that these indices are missing primary shards,
meaning they are missing data.
+

> . In order to restore the data we need to find a snapshot that contains these two indices.To find

Author: Thank you @cjcenizal for reporting them!

such a snapshot use the
<<get-snapshot-api,get snapshot API>>.
+
[source,console]
----

> GET _snapshot/snap-repo/*?verbose=false

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
GET _snapshot/my_repository/*?verbose=false
```
Keep it consistent with the restore-from-snapshot.html doc, also without the word `my`, it's hard for users to distinguish variables from ES API commands.

Author: Good point, I will fix all occurrences.

----
// TEST[skip:illustration purposes only]
+
The response will look like this:
+
[source,console-result]
----
{
  "snapshots" : [
    {
      "snapshot" : "snapshot-20200617",                                     <1>
      "uuid" : "dZyPs1HyTwS-cnKdH08EPg",

>       "repository" : "snap-repo",                                           <2>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      "repository" : "my_repository",                                           <2>
```

      "indices" : [                                                         <3>
        ".apm-agent-configuration",
        ".apm-custom-link",

>         ".ds-.logs-deprecation.elasticsearch-default-2022.06.17-000001",

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
Remove this line so that the console in the doc will not run over its limited width making users scroll.

    }
  ],
  "total" : 1,
  "remaining" : 0
}
----
// TEST[skip:illustration purposes only]
+
<1> The name of the snapshot.
+
<2> The repository of the snapshot.
+
<3> The indices backed up in the snapshot.
+
<4> If the snapshot was successful.

. The snapshot `snapshot-20200617` contains the two indices we want to restore.
You might have multiple snapshots from which you could restore the target indices. Choose the latest one.
+
. Now that we found a snapshot, we will close the target indices via the use the <<indices-close, close indices API>>.
+
[source,console]
----
POST kibana_sample_data_flights,.ds-my-data-stream-2022.06.17-000001/_close
----
// TEST[skip:illustration purposes only]
+
You can confirm that they are closed with the
the <<cat-indices, cat indices API>>.
+
[source,console]
----
GET _cat/indices?v&health=red&h=index,status,health
----
// TEST[skip:illustration purposes only]
+
The response will look like this:
+
[source,console-result]
----
index                                status health
.ds-my-data-stream-2022.06.17-000001 close   red
kibana_sample_data_flights           close   red
----
+

> . The indices are closed, now we can restore the, from snapshots without causing

Reviewer 4: Possible typo: "now we can restore the," -> "now we can restore them"

Author: Fixed

any complications using the <<restore-snapshot-api, restore snapshot API>>:
+
[source,console]
----

> POST _snapshot/snap-repo/snapshot-20200617/_restore

Author: I see you found them all :)

      "indices" : [                                                         <3>
        ".apm-agent-configuration",
        ".apm-custom-link",
        ".ds-ilm-history-5-2022.06.17-000001",
        ".ds-my-data-stream-2022.06.17-000001",
        ".geoip_databases",
        ".kibana-event-log-8.2.2-000001",
        ".kibana_8.2.2_001",
        ".kibana_task_manager_8.2.2_001",
        "kibana_sample_data_ecommerce",
        "kibana_sample_data_flights",
        "kibana_sample_data_logs"
      ],
      "data_streams" : [ ],
      "state" : "SUCCESS"                                                     <4>
    }
  ],
  "total" : 1,
  "remaining" : 0
}
----
// TEST[skip:illustration purposes only]
+
<1> The name of the snapshot.
+
<2> The repository of the snapshot.
+
<3> The indices backed up in the snapshot.
+
<4> If the snapshot was successful.

. The snapshot `snapshot-20200617` contains the two indices we want to restore.
You might have multiple snapshots from which you could restore the target indices. Choose the latest snapshot.
+
. Now that we found a snapshot, we will close the target indices via the use the <<indices-close, close indices API>>.
+
[source,console]
----

> POST kibana_sample_data_flights,.ds-my-data-stream-2022.06.17-000001/_close

Reviewer: For the last generation backing index of a data stream, in case the data stream has more than one generation, this call will fail. 
If the last generation of a data stream needs to be restored I think we should recommend rolling over the data stream and closing the (now) N-1 generation index.

Author: Great catch @andreidan , I will adjust this.

Author: Hm, I tried it and it didn't fail, this is what I tried:

1. Created a data stream
2. Indexed 3 documents
3. Manually rolled over
4. Index one more document, confirmed that it got indexed in the last generation
5. Closed the last generation
6. Tried to index another document and I got an `index_closed_exception`.

This is the scenario that you expected to fail, right?

That said, I do think it's a nice idea to rollover because that will ensure smooth indexing even while restoring a snapshot. My only concern is that I do not want to confuse the reader too much with data stream terminology (especially if we provide this as the only troubleshooting scenario for cloud and self managed).

What do you think if we say that if the index name has the pattern `.ds-my-data-stream-xxxxx` the user can assume it's a data stream and then always rollover first. This way they do not have to check if it's the latest one. Rolling over prematurely is not the best but I think since this is an "emergency" scenario it would pay off to cut that corner. 

WDYT @andreidan & @dakrone ?

Author: Done: https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/issues/88837

      "index.number_of_shards" : "1",
      "index.provided_name" : "kibana_sample_data_flights",
      "index.routing.allocation.include._tier_preference" : "data_content",
      "index.uuid" : "jMOlwKPPSzSraeeBWyuoDA",
      "index.version.created" : "8020299"
    }
  }
}
----
// TEST[skip:illustration purposes only]
+
<1> The name of an index.
+
<2> The settings of this index that contains the metadata we are looking for.
+
<3> This indicates that this index is part of a data stream and displays the data stream name.
+
<4> The name of the other index we requested.
+
The response above shows that `kibana_sample_data_flights` is not part of a data stream because it doesn't have a
field called `data_stream` in the settings.
+
On the contrary, `.ds-my-data-stream-2022.06.17-000001` is part of the data stream called `my-data-stream`. When you
find an index like this, which belongs to a data stream, you need to check if data are still being indexed.
You can see that by checking the `settings`, if you can find this property: `"index.lifecycle.indexing_complete" : "true"`,
it means that indexing is completed in this index and you can continue to the next step.
+

> If it is not there you need to rollover the data stream so you can restore the missing data without blocking

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```suggestion
If `index.lifecycle.indexing_complete` is not there or is configured to `false` you need to rollover the data stream so you can restore the missing data without blocking
```
```

      "index.number_of_shards" : "1",
      "index.provided_name" : "kibana_sample_data_flights",
      "index.routing.allocation.include._tier_preference" : "data_content",
      "index.uuid" : "jMOlwKPPSzSraeeBWyuoDA",
      "index.version.created" : "8020299"
    }
  }
}
----
// TEST[skip:illustration purposes only]
+
<1> The name of an index.
+
<2> The settings of this index that contains the metadata we are looking for.
+
<3> This indicates that this index is part of a data stream and displays the data stream name.
+
<4> The name of the other index we requested.
+
The response above shows that `kibana_sample_data_flights` is not part of a data stream because it doesn't have a
field called `data_stream` in the settings.
+
On the contrary, `.ds-my-data-stream-2022.06.17-000001` is part of the data stream called `my-data-stream`. When you
find an index like this, which belongs to a data stream, you need to check if data are still being indexed.
You can see that by checking the `settings`, if you can find this property: `"index.lifecycle.indexing_complete" : "true"`,
it means that indexing is completed in this index and you can continue to the next step.
+

> If it is not there you need to rollover the data stream so you can restore the missing data without blocking

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `index.lifecycle.indexing_complete` is not there or is configured to `false` you need to rollover the data stream so you can restore the missing data without blocking
```
